# Depth first search (for an adjacency matrix)

This is another adjacency matrix challenge: this time the challenge is to create a depth-first search method. The search function should start at the root that is passed to it as an argument and then procede through the leftmost branch of each node until it reaches the leftmost leaf node. The function should then backtrack to the lowest level node (i.e. the furthest from the root on the current branch) with unexplored child nodes and traverse through that branch until it reaches another leaf. The function should continue until the entirety of the matrix that can be reached from the specified root has been traversed. As each node is traversed, it's value should be added to an array that will be returned when the search is complete.

While the brief on fCC puts a lot of emphasis on the order in which the depth-first search works, it seems the tests to pass this challenge do not check the order of the values in the function's results. I have added some comments in my code to indicate which lines are needed to get the result in the correct order, but these lines of code are not technically required to pass the result.

This doesn't seem quite right to me, and I may post something on the message boards to query this. (As it stands, I believe that all that is needed to pass the challenge is for the function to return a list of all the nodes that can be reached from the root in any order. As such, one possible solution would be to re-hash the breadth-first search function from the previous challenge to return an array of all the nodes that are not 'Infinity' steps away from the root.)
